Over the next several videos, I am going to show you how to visualize data in Python using the library
called matplotlib.
It's quite a mouthful.
It is matplotlib like this.
And in particular there is a module in the matplotlib library called pie plot.
Now this is an awful lot of text to write out every time you want to generate a plot, or modify a plot,
or add something to a plot.
So therefore people typically import this using the abbreviation PLT.
This is nearly universal.
This is basically how most people abbreviate matplotlib.
Okay, so let's do a basic demonstration plt dot plot.
This is the function in the matplotlib pyplot library that will allow you to draw data to a figure,
and the general usage of plt.plot is to input a x coordinate and a y coordinate.
So let's just run this code and see what happens.
So what happens is let's see.
So first of all we get some text output that actually just corresponds to an address where this plot
object is represented.
And now here we see a graph.
We see an axis but it's all white.
Looks like two white bunny rabbits in a snowstorm.
So where are the data?
Where's the data that we drew?
Well, it turns out that this that the plot function actually did draw something at three comma four,
you can see the x axis is three and here is four.
But there's basically just a dot that's so small that you don't see it.
So what we want to do is add some kind of a marker using an optional third input.
So the third input is going to be surrounded by single quotes.
And here I will use an O.
So this is not a zero.
This is the letter O.
And now you see we get a dot here at coordinate three comma four.
So x equals three y equals four.
And then I drew a dot.
Okay let's draw something else.
So plt dot plot.
How about two comma four.
And now here I'm going to draw a square.
So notice here we get a circle.
Here we get a little square.
And you can also see that the colors are different.
Now nowhere in this code did I actually tell Python which colors to use.
Python has a built in sequence of colors that it cycles through.
So it's automatically picking the color for each new plot element based on the order in which that element
is drawn.
Okay, let's do some more.
Let's add some more information to our matplotlib knowledge arsenal.
So first of all, let me I'm just going to redraw some.
Okay.
So now I put an R in front of the O here.
And that gives me a red circle.
And now I will write PLT dot plot.
Let's go for two.
How about I don't know comma minus one.
And what's your favorite color.
Well I think you said blue.
And now I'm going to write the letter P.
P is for Pentagon.
And so here we get the red circle.
And oh and here we get a blue pentagon.
Now when you are looking at this on your screen, it might not be so obvious that these markers have
different shapes, but they actually do in I think the in two videos from now, I will show you how
to stylize these plots to make the markers bigger.
Actually, maybe I'll just show you right now.
There's no reason to wait so long.
Okay.
So I will write comma.
I'm going to add another optional input here.
And this is marker size.
And let's set this marker size to be 20.
Now you see this is much bigger.
How about marker size equals 200.
Okay.
So now this marker is so big that it's like only halfway inside the plot area.
How about two.
Now this marker is really, really small.
It's so small that if your laptop screen is dirty, you might actually mistake this for a little crumb
on your laptop screen.
Okay, so there's no, you know, correct size to make these markers.
It's you just play around with some different values and see what looks good in the plot based on what
else is going on in the plot.
What other information you have drawn to the plot?
Okay, now what if this were from one particular piece of data and this were from a different piece
of data?
We might want to have a legend in here to show us what are the yeah, what these data actually correspond
to.
So to add a legend that you associate with each different call to Plt.plot, you can add another optional
input called label.
So label.
Uh, yeah.
Let's call this data a.
And this one I will say label equals data two.
There you go.
So now we don't have to worry about letters versus numbers here.
Okay.
Uh, hey, where's the, uh, legend I wrote in label for each of these lines.
And it doesn't look like anything changed in the plots.
Okay, so what's going on here is that we have provided information about a legend, but we didn't actually
activate the legend.
So to show the legend, we need to write another function.
And that is called plt dot legend.
Now in this case, this is an example of a function that takes no inputs and provides no outputs.
So there are optional inputs.
For example, if you want to specify the location of the legend, or the font size or the color of the
legend, there are optional inputs that you can provide, but you do not need to provide any inputs
and you don't need to get any outputs.
Okay, so now we see our legend here.
And also the marker here is larger.
The Pentagon is is larger than the circle because of what I specified here.
Okay.
So now let's see what we can do about this pesky address.
Here I will write PLT dot show.
And now it draws the graph without giving an output from any of these previous lines.
Now if you are working in a Jupyter notebook like on Colab, like what you see here, you don't actually
need to write plt dot show it.
Just the figure will always automatically draw whenever you call plt.plot.
But if you are using different Ides, different interactive development environments, then you might
actually need to write plt.show before the graph is actually displayed.
Okay, so there we go.
We get our plots, we get some data, and we have a legend.
So far I've just been manually entering the numbers into Plt.plot.
What I want to demonstrate now is using variables in plt dot plots.
So let's say a equals four and b equals how about 5.6.
And now I write plt dot plot a.
And how about b squared minus a to the power of six.
It's just some random thing.
Okay.
And then let's make this a how about for something different I can make this a triangle.
So here we have an upward facing triangle.
I'm going to do marker size equals 12.
So you can see that this is a upward facing triangle.
That's with the caret symbol here.
Okay.
And yeah, this is not terribly different from what I showed you earlier.
Just so you can see that you can have variables and entire mathematical equations built right into the
Plt.plot function.
All of the plots that I have drawn so far involve dots.
What if we want to draw lines?
How do we draw lines with plt.plot?
So the idea is that we are specifying here an individual point.
And if you want to draw a line you need to specify a set of points.
And then matplotlib will draw a line between those sets of points.
So let me give you a simple illustration of drawing a line.
So I want a line that goes from on the x axis.
It goes from 0 to 1, and on the y axis it goes from 0 to 2.
And let's make this a magenta line.
Okay.
So now you see a line and it goes on the x axis 0 to 1 and the y axis 0 to 2.
So there you go.
One potential point of confusion for drawing lines is that people would initially expect this to be
the the the point x, x1 y1.
And the second input would be the point x2 y2.
So but that is not how it's set up.
It's set up that you first specify all the x axis values, and then you specify all the y axis values
and they get paired.
So this is x1 y1 and this.
So that corresponds to this point here.
And the second numbers are x2 and y2.
And that corresponds to this point over here okay.
So magenta line.
Let's say we want some squares at the end of them.
So now I will write M for square.
So magenta m for magenta and S for square.
And hey, wait a minute.
Where did the line go that got rid of the line?
There's no more line there.
So what we specified here is that the marker should be square.
And that means that no line is drawn.
If you want a line, then you can write a minus sign over here for a dash.
So now we get two markers.
We get the line and we get the the actual markers that I specified here.
Okay.
And there's other options.
For example if you write two minus signs then you get a dashed line.
If you write a colon then you get a dotted line.
There's lots of options that you can do for stylizing these plots.
Okay.
So that is one line.
And now I will draw another line.
And how about I want a straight line that goes across like this a horizontal line.
So how do we draw a horizontal line here.
So the x values are zero and one and what are the Y values?
If I want to line a horizontal line that just goes across here, the y values are they're just zero.
So it's just zero and zero.
And let's make this a green line like this okay.
Very nice.
The last thing I will illustrate in this video is drawing lines with more points that will give us curved
lines instead of just straight lines.
So let me import numpy as np and then I will create one variable x.
Let's make this linearly spaced numbers between 0 and 3 pi I want pi.
You know what pi is.
Pi is the uh this funny number here.
It's 3.14 blah blah blah.
So if we just try writing pi like this, uh, that is unfortunately not defined, but there is a numpy
function for pi, so you just write OOP.
Let me comment this out.
Import numpy.
And now I can write numpy.py.
And this is an approximation of the symbol for pi.
Okay.
So I want numbers from 0 to 3 pi.
And how many numbers do we want between them.
Let's say how about 1001 numbers between 0 and 3 pi.
And let's see what this looks like.
Okay.
So we don't see all the numbers because that would just be gratuitous.
But you can see we the first element is zero.
The next element is 0.0094, etc..
And then it goes all the way up to 9.4, which is three pi.
Okay.
So that is our x vector and y.
And actually let me show you the length too just to confirm.
Uh oops sorry.
That's x dot shape.
Uh, yeah.
Just so you can see that the shape of x, so the size, the dimensions of x is 1001, which is exactly
what I specified here.
Okay, so now I will set Y to be equal to numpy dot sine of x.
So here you see a new function that you may not have come across before.
This is just the sine function.
So like sine and cosine and so on.
It's the Trig function sine.
Now I write plt dot plot x comma y.
Let's make this a black line.
And I'll put a legend in here that says uh pretty sine wave.
Okay.
It's probably not really going to be that pretty.
It's fairly basic, but that's good enough for now.
Okay.
So here we get our sine wave.
Now this looks like a curve but it's actually not really a curve.
It's really a sequence of straight line segments.
But there are 1001 or 1000 segments defined by 1001 points.
And so from this resolution it looks like it's a smooth, curved line.
But really it's just a bunch of straight lines.
Just like here we have a straight line drawn between two points.
And you can see that by for example, if I only do 11 now, you can really see clearly and actually
let me plot this as how about dots with a line like this.
Maybe that's not big enough.
Let's do circles.
Okay, so now you really see that what Python is really drawing is not an actual sine wave, but a sequence
of straight line segments that follow each successive pair of x and y coordinates.
So we get straight line segments.
But when the resolution is pretty high, then yeah, you start to get so many of these line segments
that it looks like it's a smooth, continuous line.